For the purpose of and when used in the Oklahoma Income Tax Act, unless the context otherwise requires: 1. "Tax Commission" means the Oklahoma Tax Commission; 2. "Internal Revenue Code" means the United States Internal Revenue Code, as the same may be amended or adopted from time to time applicable to the taxable year; and other provisions of the laws of the United States relating to federal income taxes, as the same may be or become effective at any time or from time to time applicable to the taxable year; 3. Any term used in the Oklahoma Income Tax Act shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in the Internal Revenue Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. For all taxable periods covered by the Oklahoma Income Tax Act, the tax status and all elections of all taxpayers covered by the Oklahoma Income Tax Act shall be the same for all purposes material hereto as they are for federal income tax purposes except when the Oklahoma Income Tax Act specifically provides otherwise; 4. "Resident individual" means a natural person who is domiciled in this state, and any other natural person who spends in the aggregate more than seven (7) months of the taxable year within this state shall be presumed to be a resident for purposes of the Oklahoma Income Tax Act in absence of proof to the contrary. A natural person who resides less than seven (7) months of the taxable year within this state is presumed to be a "part-year resident individual" for purposes of the Oklahoma Income Tax Act, in absence of proof to the contrary. A "nonresident individual" means an individual other than a resident individual or a part-year resident individual. For all tax years beginning after December 31, 1981, a nonresident individual, with respect to foreign earned income and deductions, shall include an individual who: a. during any period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months is out of the United States at least five hundred fifty (550) days, b. during such period referred to in subparagraph a of this paragraph is not present in this state for more than ninety (90) days during any taxable year, c. during any period of less than an entire taxable year, which period is contained within the period referred to in subparagraph a of this paragraph, is not present in this state for a number of days in excess of an amount which bears the same ratio to ninety (90) days as the number of days contained in the period of less than an entire taxable year bears to three hundred sixty-five (365), and d. during such period referred to in subparagraph a of this paragraph does not maintain a permanent place of abode in this state at which the spouse of the individual, unless such spouse is legally separated, or minor children of the individual are present for more than one hundred eighty (180) days; 5. "Resident estate" means the estate of a decedent who at death was domiciled in this state. "Nonresident estate" means an estate other than a resident estate; 6. "Resident trust" means: a. a trust, or a portion of a trust, consisting of property transferred by will of a decedent domiciled in this state at death, or a trust, or a portion of a trust, consisting of the property of a person domiciled in this state if such trust is not irrevocable, and b. a trust, or portion of a trust, consisting of property of a person domiciled in this state at the time such property was transferred to the trust if such trust or portion was then irrevocable or a person domiciled in this state at the time such trust or portion became irrevocable. A trust, or portion of a trust, is irrevocable if it is not subject to a power exercisable solely by the transferor of such property, at any time, to revest title in the transferor. "Nonresident trust" means a trust other than a resident trust; 7. "Resident partner" means a partner who is a resident individual, a resident estate, a resident trust or a resident corporation. "Nonresident partner" means a partner other than a resident partner; 8. "Resident beneficiary" means a beneficiary of an estate or trust which beneficiary is a resident individual, a resident estate, a resident trust or a resident corporation. "Nonresident beneficiary" means a beneficiary other than a resident beneficiary; 9. "Resident corporation" means a corporation whose principal place of business is located within the State of Oklahoma. "Nonresident corporation" means any corporation other than a resident corporation; 10. "Taxable income" with respect to any taxpayer means the "taxable income", "life insurance company taxable income", "mutual insurance company taxable income", "(regulated) investment company taxable income", "real estate investment trust taxable income", and "cooperatives' taxable income" and any other "taxable income" as defined in the Internal Revenue Code as applies to such taxpayer or any other income of such taxpayer including, but not limited to, lump sum distributions as defined by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; provided, in the case of income derived from oil and gas well production, any taxpayer, at his or her option, may deduct as an allowance for depletion, in lieu of other calculation of depletion based on the cost of the oil and gas deposit, twenty-two percent (22%) of the gross income derived from the properties during the taxable year. Provided further, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, and ending on or before December 31, 2011, and for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2014, for major oil companies as defined in Section 288.2 of Title 52 of the Oklahoma Statutes, such allowance shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the net income of the taxpayer (computed without allowance for depletion) from the property. During taxable years other than those specified herein, for all taxpayers, such allowance shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the net income of the taxpayer (computed without allowance for depletion) from the property. If a depletion allowance is allowed as a deduction in arriving at the adjusted gross income in the case of an individual, or taxable income for corporations and trusts, or distributable income of partnerships by the Internal Revenue Service, the percentage depletion so calculated shall in no event be a duplication of depletion allowed on the Federal Income Tax Return; 11. "Adjusted gross income" means "adjusted gross income" as defined in the Internal Revenue Code; 12. "Oklahoma taxable income" means "taxable income" as reported (or as would have been reported by the taxpayer had a return been filed) to the federal government, and in the event of adjustments thereto by the federal government as finally ascertained under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted further as hereinafter provided; 13. "Oklahoma adjusted gross income" means "adjusted gross income" as reported to the federal government (or as would have been reported by the taxpayer had a return been filed), or in the event of adjustments thereby by the federal government as finally ascertained under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted further as hereinafter provided; 14. "State" means any state of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any territory or possession of the United States or any political subdivision thereof; and 15. "Taxpayer" means any person subject to a tax imposed by this Article, or whose income is, in whole or in part, subject to a tax imposed by any provision of this article. Added by Laws 1971, c. 137, § 3, emerg. eff. May 11, 1971. Amended by Laws 1972, c. 252, § 1, emerg. eff. April 7, 1972; Laws 1975, c. 264, § 1, emerg. eff. June 4, 1975; Laws 1982, c. 293, § 1, emerg. eff. May 24, 1982; Laws 1989, c. 249, § 29, eff. Jan. 1, 1990; Laws 1994, c. 278, § 24, eff. Sept. 1, 1994; Laws 1996, c. 360, § 3, eff. July 1, 1996; Laws 2001, c. 249, § 3, eff. July 1, 2001; Laws 2003, c. 463, § 2, emerg. eff. June 7, 2003; Laws 2006, c. 272, § 12, eff. Nov. 1, 2006; Laws 2013, c. 401, § 4, eff. Nov. 1, 2013.