As used in this chapter, the following words have the meaning provided unless otherwise required by the context:
(1) "Taxpayer" includes an individual, trust, estate, partnership, association, company, corporation, or any other entity subject to the tax imposed by this chapter or required to file a return.
(2) "Resident individual" means an individual domiciled in this State. A "nonresident individual" means an individual other than a resident individual or a part-year resident.
(3) "Part-year resident" means an individual who is a resident individual for only a portion of the tax year.
(4) "Resident estate" means the estate of a decedent who was domiciled in this State at death. "Nonresident estate" means an estate other than a resident estate.
(5) "Resident trust" means a trust administered in this State. "Nonresident trust" is a trust other than a resident trust.
(6) "Resident beneficiary" means a beneficiary of an estate or trust who is a resident individual, resident estate, resident trust, resident partnership, or resident corporation. "Nonresident beneficiary" means a beneficiary other than a resident beneficiary.
(7) "Resident partner" means a partner who is a resident individual, resident estate, resident trust, or resident corporation or resident partnership during the taxable year. "Nonresident partner" means a partner other than a resident partner.
(8) "Resident corporation" means a corporation whose principal place of business, as defined in item (9), is located within this State. "Nonresident corporation" means a corporation other than a resident corporation.
(9) "Principal place of business" means the domicile of a corporation. However, when none of the business of the corporation is conducted in the state of domicile, the department shall determine the principal place of business of the corporation based upon the available evidence.
(10) "Business" includes trade, profession, occupation, or employment.
(11) "Tangible property" includes real property and corporeal personal property but does not include money, bank deposits, shares of stock, bonds, credits, evidences of debt, choses in action, or evidences of an interest in property.
(12) "Intangible property" means all property other than tangible property.
HISTORY: 1995 Act No. 76, SECTION 1.