--- Source: uk-worthing/manual/council-tax-reduction-scheme-2026-2027/page-46 ---
32.0— Amount of reduction under this scheme: Classes D to F (1) Where a person is entitled to a reduction under this scheme in respect of a day, the amount of the reduction to which he is entitled is as follows. (2) Where the person is within class D, that amount is the amount which is the maximum council tax reduction in respect of the day in the applicant's case. (3) Where the person is within class E, that amount is the amount found by deducting amount B from amount A, where “amount A” and “amount B” have the meanings given in paragraph 14(f) or 17(f), as the case may be. (4) Where the person is within class F, that amount is the amount which is the alternative maximum council tax reduction in respect of the day in the applicant's case. (5) Sub-paragraph (6) applies where both: (a) sub-paragraph (2) or sub-paragraph (3), and (b) sub-paragraph (4), apply to a person. (6) The amount of the reduction to which the person is entitled is whichever is the greater of: (a) the amount of the reduction given by sub-paragraph (2) or sub-paragraph (3), as the case may be, and (b) the amount of the reduction given by sub-paragraph (4). Worthing Borough Council - Council Tax Reduction Scheme 2026/27 46

--- Source: uk-worthing/manual/council-tax-reduction-scheme-2026-2027/page-25 ---
12.0 Classes of person entitled to a reduction under this scheme. (1) The classes of person described in paragraphs 13 to 18 are entitled to a reduction under this scheme. (2) In those paragraphs, references to the applicant's income or capital include, in a case where that income or capital cannot accurately be determined, references to the applicant's estimated income or capital. 13.0 Class D: persons who are not pensioners whose income is less than the applicable amount. On any day class D consists of any person who is not a pensioner: (a) who is for that day liable to pay council tax in respect of a dwelling of which he is a resident; (b) who, subject to paragraph 19 (periods of absence from a dwelling), is not absent from the dwelling throughout the day; (c) in respect of whom a maximum council tax reduction amount can be calculated; (d) who does not fall within a class of person not entitled to a reduction under this scheme; (e) whose income (if any) for the relevant week is less than his applicable amount, and (f) who has made an application. 14.0 Class E: persons who are not pensioners whose income is greater than the applicable amount. On any day class E consists of any person who is not a pensioner: (a) who is for that day liable to pay council tax in respect of a dwelling of which he is a resident; (b) who, subject to paragraph 19 (periods of absence from a dwelling), is not absent from the dwelling throughout the day; (c) in respect of whom a maximum council tax reduction amount can be calculated; (d) who does not fall within a class of person not entitled to a reduction under this scheme; (e) whose income for the relevant week is greater than his applicable amount; (f) in respect of whom amount A exceeds amount B where— (i) amount A is the maximum council tax reduction in his case; and (ii) amount B is 2 6/7 per cent of the difference between his income for the relevant week and his applicable amount, and (g) who has made an application. 15.0 Class F: alternative maximum council tax reduction – persons who are not pensioners. (1) On any day class F consists of any person who is not a pensioner— (a) who is for that day liable to pay council tax in respect of a dwelling of which he is a resident; (b) who, subject to paragraph 19 (periods of absence from a dwelling), is not absent from the dwelling throughout the day; (c) in respect of whom a maximum council tax reduction amount can be calculated; (d) who does not fall within a class of person not entitled to a reduction under this scheme; (e) who has made an application; and (f) in relation to whom the condition in sub-paragraph (2) is met. (2) The condition referred to in sub-paragraph (1)(f) is that no other resident of the dwelling is liable to pay rent to the person in question in respect of the dwelling and there is an alternative maximum council tax reduction in respect of the day in the case of that person which is derived from the income, or aggregate incomes, of one or more residents to whom this sub-paragraph applies. (3) Sub-paragraph (2) applies to any other resident of the dwelling who: (a) is not a person who, in accordance with Schedule 1 to the 1992 Act, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of discount; and (b) is not a person who is liable for council tax solely in consequence of the provisions of section 9 of the 1992 Act (spouse's or civil partner's joint and several liability for tax); (c) is not a person who is residing with a couple or with the members of a polygamous marriage where the applicant for the reduction is a member of that couple or of that marriage and— Worthing Borough Council - Council Tax Reduction Scheme 2026/27 25