93 (07/2026) Chapter 2:Eligibility • Section 1: Application Application Introduction There are multiple ways an individual can submit an application to ODHS|OHA. Some procedures change depending on the type of form submitted, the method (printed or online) and if the application is new or a recertification/ renewal. Every application contains information that helps determine the processing timelines and eligibility for the programs the individual is requesting. The application process should not be a barrier to the people accessing benefits. It should be simple, efficient and responsive to the needs of persons seeking help. It should also consider the privacy and confidentiality of each applicant. Whenever possible, one application is used to determine eligibility under multiple programs. Individuals can use the following paper applications: • DHS 0415F Application (for SNAP, ERDC, REF, TANF, TA-DVS), • DHS 7476 Employment Related Day Care and SNAP Application (for ERDC and SNAP only), and • OHP 7210 Application for Oregon Health Plan (OHP) Benefits (for OSIPM, MSP, HSD programs and LTC services) Other resources Service Guide for Language Access: Process on how to handle alternate format request Online application The OregonONEligibility (ONE) system is an online application that gives Oregonians the option to apply for medical, cash, child care, food benefits and long-term care using a single online application. Individuals may apply for assistance and update information through the ONE Applicant Portal using a secure login. Individuals may also apply and update information using a paper form, and an eligibility worker will enter the information into ONE using the Worker Portal. Other resources Application Status *includes screenshots: Describes how to Quick Search for an Application, view an application number through Case Summary and conduct a Task Search for an unprocessed application. Application Matrix QRG: This document is intended as a reference to guide you as applications are received to be processed in ONE. Date of request The date of request (DOR) is the date the request for benefits is received by ODHS|OHA. A DOR is established and documented by ODHS|OHA. Once a date of request is established, an Eligibility Worker must process the application