--- Source: us-wv/statute/11-21-3 ---
§11-21-3. Imposition of tax; persons subject to tax.

(a) Imposition of tax. — A tax determined in accordance with the rates hereinafter set forth in this article is hereby imposed for each taxable year on the West Virginia taxable income of every individual, estate, electing pass-through entity, and trust: Provided , That, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, the income of a non-grantor trust administered by a licensed private trust company created pursuant to the provisions of §31I-1-1 et seq . of this code shall have no tax imposed upon it by this section.

(b) Partners and partnerships. — A partnership or other pass-through entity as such shall not be subject to tax under this article, unless the partnership or other pass-through entity elects to be subject to the tax levied under this section for a taxable year pursuant to §11-21-3a of this code. Persons carrying on business as partners or owners of a pass-through entity shall be liable for tax under this article only in their separate or individual capacities, unless the partnership or other pass-through entity elects to be subject to the tax levied under this section for a taxable year pursuant to §11-21-3a of this code. However, partnerships and other pass-through entities are subject to the tax imposed by this article to the extent they elect to pay additional West Virginia income taxes owed that are attributable to final federal partnership audit adjustments under §11-21A-3 of this code.

(c) Associations taxable as corporations. — An association, trust, or other unincorporated organization which is taxable as a corporation for federal income tax purposes, shall not be subject to tax under this article.

(d) Exempt trusts and organizations. — A trust or other unincorporated organization which by reason of its purposes or activities is exempt from federal income tax shall be exempt from tax under this article (regardless of whether subject to federal income tax on unrelated business taxable income).

(e) Cross references. — For definitions of West Virginia taxable income of:

(1) Resident individual, see §11-21-11 of this code.

(2) Resident estate or trust, see §11-21-18 of this code.

(3) Nonresident individual, see §11-21-30 of this code.

(4) Nonresident estate or trust, see §11-21-38 of this code.

(f) Effective date. — This section as amended in 2023 shall apply to taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2022.

--- Source: us-wv/statute/11-21-10 ---
§11-21-10. Low income exclusion.

(a) Earned income exclusion. -- In the case of an eligible taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a deduction from federal adjusted gross income the amount of his or her earned income included therein, not to exceed $10,000, except that when a husband and wife file separate returns under this article this exclusion shall not exceed $5,000 per separate return: Provided, That for the taxable year beginning January 1, 1996, the exclusion provided for in this section shall apply only to earned income received after June 30, 1996, and the amount excluded shall not exceed fifty percent of the annual low income exclusion amounts set forth in this subsection.

(b) "Eligible taxpayer" defined. -- The term "eligible taxpayer" means:

(1) Any unmarried individual and any husband and wife filing a joint return under this article who has or have federal adjusted gross income of $10,000 or less for the taxable year; or

(2) Any husband or wife filing a separate return under this article who has federal adjusted gross income of $5,000 or less.

(c) "Earned income" defined. --

(1) The term "earned income" means:

(A) Wages, salaries, tips, and other employee compensation; plus

(B) The amount of the taxpayer's net earnings from self-employment for the taxable year (within the meaning of Section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code), but such net earnings shall be determined with regard to the deduction allowed to the taxpayer under Section 164 of the Internal Revenue Code.

(2) For purposes of this section:

(A) The earned income of an individual shall be computed without regard to any community property laws;

(B) No amount received as pension or annuity shall be taken into account; and

(c) No amount received for services provided by an individual while the individual is an inmate at a penal institution shall be taken into account.

(d) Taxable year must be full taxable year. -- Except in the case of a taxable year closed by reason of the death of the taxpayer, no credit shall be allowed under this section in the case of a taxable year covering a period of less than twelve months.