A. Income eligibility is determined based on the composition of the household. A household shall
meet the gross and net monthly income eligibility standards as outlined in this section. See
section 4.401.1 and 4.401.2 for the gross and net percentages of the Federal Poverty Levels.
1. ECE households must have gross income below two hundred percent (200%) of the
federal poverty level.
2. BCE households shall be deemed as having met gross and net income limits.
3. Households that are not considered ECE or BCE and are instead subject to SE rules
shall meet income eligibility standards as follows:
a. Households that do not include a member who is aged sixty (60) and older or a
person with a disability shall have gross income at or below one hundred thirty
percent (130%) of the federal poverty level and have a net income at or below
one hundred percent (100%) of the federal poverty level.
b. Households that include a member who is aged sixty (60) and older or a person
with a disability shall have a net income at or below one hundred percent (100%)
of the federal poverty level.
4. For household members who are persons that are aged sixty (60) and older and/or have
a disability, who are unable to purchase and prepare meals because they suffer from a
disability considered permanent under the Social Security Act, or a non-disease related,
severe, permanent disability, may be considered, together with his or her spouse if the
spouse is living in the same home, a separate household from the others with whom the
individual lives. The combined income of the others with whom the individual who is aged
sixty (60) and older and a person with disabilities resides (excluding the income of the
individual who is aged sixty (60) and older and a person with disabilities and his or her
spouse) must not exceed one hundred sixty-five percent (165%) of the poverty level.
B. Ineligible students and household members who are ineligible due to citizenship status,
intentional program violation, failure to cooperate with work programs, or failure to provide or
apply for a Social Security Number, shall be excluded when determining the household size and
the appropriate income eligibility maximum and/or level of benefits.